[Music]
good afternoon
yoko how are you good afternoon i'm fine
thank you thank you thank you very much
for for accepting uh this talking to us
we are going to make this interview so
we can broadcast to the rest of our
university community
and first of all
maybe we would like to know a bit about
you about
yourself and and a bit of your
background can you
maybe just explain a couple of of
where so people can know you a bit more
my name is yoko gulen and
you promoted very well
and i'm from finland
i have a background very
long so maybe i will give a short
percentage rather how long it would be
take six or seven hours but
my
basically i started
when after graduated university as a
technical research center
i was a research engineer for nine years
and then we started to develop
and research and develop
mobile phones systems in finland
and then i
make a research in technical research
center and then i moved when they found
the nokia company
and i made a
design and
developed
first nokia mobile phones since 80s
and then i was working
30 years in nokia
first running r d
and then
start to make global sales
worldwide and
after that
when nokia you remember what we happened
microsoft bought our mobile phone store
then i moved
out nokia and took my team and set up a
ict company
and then i was
running 10 years ict company
and then
we
planted
something new that
make that really
benefit for people
and then we decided
after we have seen this
system
very
warm and air
this air pump
dropping water
so i we did support that what's
happening there while there is water
coming out
and then we
started to
develop a research and then we found out
that hey
we possible can develop a system
to
produce water from air
and that i have been doing now
four years and we made a first prototype
until now we have
a system that we
can
sell
for different purposes
drinkable water industrial water and so
on
and we have done some
business in
asia
africa and now
with jaime we have possibility to come
to chile
and of course
the technology point of view
it's very simple
actually it has been
already
developed somehow in the university's
early 90s already that it's a question
about
condensate water
from the air
so when we our system when we build that
we blow the
air through the
machine
and then we have a cooling system
with
measures first what is the air
temperature what is the humidity
and after that they see that what it's a
so-called new point
means that
water starts to drop
down
and cooling system makes this
air coming close to dew point
and then then start to drop the water
we call it gray water and then after
filtering ultraviolet
we purify and then it's a drinkable
water
and we have a system here to show that
what does it mean and how it works
maybe um just before going a bit into
more details about this new endeavor
where you are
it's interesting that in your um
professional career you you pass from a
very
high
telecom
technologies and and amazing uh
developments uh done by nokia
and and suddenly changing
after so many years working there
changing to
this new
area on on environmental technologies
is there a reason in particular that
motivated you uh
or was the reason the one that you say
about
trying to continue making technologies
for society what's what's what was the
that that change
maybe i i was basically
in the beginning
this kind of research mind of type that
i got ideas and trying to
invent something new all the time
and because of nokia it took some time
to do all these things when we have this
mobile phone smartphone
this kind of internet devices and all
these kind of it took so many years
that
jump out and start to do something
really new and what this
really mean
for people in the world
so that this kind of
basic
development mind has been in the from
the beginning
that's that's amazing um
in regards to the actual uh company that
you are running with this uh equipment
that transform uh water from the air
there are some local technologies in
chile i don't know if you have seen the
ones that they they use
in the in the andes in particular or
more up north with these walls
that collect
the the moisture from from from from the
air
but very maybe with not so
much efficiency um
but but this interest on on exploring
that uh condensation process it's it's
been there also in in local communities
um
where uh with the instruments that you
are building
how do you perform how do you increase
the the the performance what's what's uh
what's how do you characterize uh that
transformation from moisture to
actual water that it could be drinkable
it actually based it on modular system
so as i was in nokia development this
kind of module that
the inquiry is
producing with more modules so in
this system also that if we have a 100
liter system then if we had 1000 liter
we just put more of these
units together in one system and that's
a simple idea to increase the production
true modular modularity yeah so you can
think on a system that uses a small unit
for certain environment if you need more
you you
you adapt it exactly you added new
modules yeah
just to finish um
we are in an engineering school
what will be your one important message
for students that
have to deal with new challenges
upcoming in terms of environment in
terms of resources but at the same time
they are learning about these
technologies that that are around
and countries like chile are not well
known to develop technology which is
maybe different from finland which is
scandinavia is famous for
having a culture of development
technologies but
is there an opportunity also for
countries like chile
to participate into solving uh
global problems through technology what
will be your message for for in this new
upcoming engineering students
there are a lot of opportunities and
i think that nowadays it's more this
kind of uh
co-op
operation with different countries
different universities
so like i have
during the nokia i work at a lot of with
mit
in the u.s and then i work at with
mexico
monterrey university it's a similar type
of so that
like i
was also in asia and in
in kazakhstan for instance
that we we have worked together with so
where i come
i come from all it's not finland
and there is a technical
university and i have done
many many projects with
uh with in this university with uh
different so
i think that that the research is
very very important
development is easier in a way because
this is a different kind of but like
there is two uh kind of uh research
there is basic research and then is it
this kind of uh
uh how they said
applying this exactly because
now i am taking for instance this system
this water system i think that
if we could with you also
uh some kind of
study and research
further and further maybe there is
something you can improve and also
another thing is that sila is different
area than other
what is the best solution or application
set up for your
area local conditions yeah exactly yeah
and that there are still a lot of things
to improve but i have been
in like a
in a
mining industry
and oil and
seeking a lot of
because i have always idea that how we
could
see that we could change this chemical
things we are using for natural
things rather than
destroying the
ground
that's that's excellent thank you very
much for your your time and for the
message to our students
[Music]
you